DOC-2284: Add new documentation for `Revision History` Plugin. (#3071)
tinymce/tinymce-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/revisionhistory.adoc

= Revision History Plugin
:navtitle: Revision History
:description: A view that allows {productname} users to see historical snapshots of a document and an ability to restore from a snapshot
:description_short: View containing historical snapshots of a document.
:keywords: plugin, Revision History, history, version, snapshots, restore, changes
:pluginname: Revision History
:plugincode: revisionhistory
:plugincategory: premium

include::partial$misc/admon-revisionhistory-paid-addon-pricing.adoc[]

include::partial$misc/admon-requires-7.0v.adoc[]

The {pluginname} plugin offers users the ability to view document changes over time and restore previous versions effortlessly.

== Interactive example

liveDemo::{plugincode}[]

include::partial$misc/admon-iframe-only.adoc[]

== How it works

The {pluginname} view is accessible via either the `revisionhistory` toolbar button or menu button within the `View` menu.

The key components are:

> 1. In the toolbar header, there are two buttons.
> * `Restore this version`: Set the selected version's content to the editor and close the view.
> * `Close`: Exit the view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the diff view header, there are two buttons.
* `Restore this version`: Set the selected version's content to the editor and close the view.
* `Close`: Close the view.
```

2. The readonly diff view presents the changes between the selected version and its immediate predecessor, clearly highlighting for easy recognition. The changes are also color-coded for clarity:

> * Red: Removed content
> * Green: New content
> * Yellow: Content being modified. Modifications to HTML content implies attribute or format changes (bold, italic, etc)
> 3. The revisions sidebar displays all available document versions. When a new version is selected, the diff view is updated accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Red: Removed content.
* Green: New content.
* Yellow: Content being modified. Modifications to HTML content implies attributes or formatting (e.g., bold, italic, etc.).
3. The revisions sidebar displays all available document versions. When a new version is selected, the diff view is updated accordingly.
```

[NOTE]
The default highlighting colors can be customized using the xref:revisionhistory_css_url[`+revisionhistory_css_url+`] option.

[NOTE]
The {pluginname} plugin interprets commented HTML as valid content, yet it disregards this content during the version comparison process. Consequently, a version containing solely commented content appears as empty in the user interface displaying the differential content.

== Basic setup

To setup the {pluginname} plugin user-interface in the editor:

* add `{plugincode}` to the `plugins` option in the editor configuration;
* add `{plugincode}` to the `toolbar` option in the editor configuration;
* add `{plugincode}_fetch` option to the editor configuration;

For example:

[source,js]
----
tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',  // change this value according to your HTML
  plugins: 'revisionhistory',
  toolbar: 'revisionhistory',
  // Required
  revisionhistory_fetch: () => new Promise((resolve) => {
    const revisions = [];  // Replace this with an API request to get saved versions
    resolve(revisions);
  })
});
----

== Understanding initial and current versions

> When dealing with a new document, that has no saved versions, {pluginname} plugin will always typically maintain two versions: the `initial` and `current` versions.
> 
> * Initial Version: this version is generated during the {productname} `Loaded` event, with the editor's content initialized.
> * Current Version: is created on opening the {pluginname} with the editor's current content. If included, it will become the `latest version` and placed at the top of the revisions list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When dealing with a new document, that has no saved versions, {pluginname} plugin will always typically maintain two versions: the `initial` and `current` versions.

* Initial Version: This version is generated during the {productname} `Loaded` event, with the editor's initial content.
* Current Version: This is generated upon accessing the {pluginname}, reflecting the editor's current content. When included, it becomes the `latest version` and is placed at the top of the revisions list.
```

[TIP]

> When the editor is initialized with content, both versions' content are the same. In that case, the {pluginname} only keeps the `current version`.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the editor is initialized with content and both versions contain the same content, the {pluginname} retains only the `current version`.

```

> For documents with saved versions, the `initial version` is disregarded by the {pluginname} assuming it's already part of the version history. The current version is discarded if its content matches the closest saved version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For documents with saved versions, the `current version` is discarded if its content matches the closest saved version.
```

Reviewer 2: Removing `the initial version is disregarded...` would cause confusion when the initial version is not shown and there are saved versions.

> The below table summaries how versions are handled in {pluginname}:
> 
> [cols="1,1,1,3", options="header"]
> |===
> |Has Initial Version |Current Version |Has Saved Versions |Expectation
> |No |N/A |No |No versions are shown
> |No |N/A |Yes |Only the saved versions are shown
> |Yes |Same |No |Only the current version is shown
> |Yes |Different |No |Both the initial and current versions are shown
> |Yes |Either |Yes |The saved versions and the current version are shown
> |===
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The table below summarizes how versions are handled in the {pluginname}:

[cols="1,1,1,3", options="header"]
|===
|Has Initial Version |Current Version |Has Saved Versions |Expectation
|No |N/A |No |No versions are shown
|No |N/A |Yes |Only the saved versions are shown
|Yes |N/A |No |Only the current version is shown
|Yes |Different |No |Both the initial and current versions are shown
|Yes |N/A |Yes |The saved versions and the current version are shown
|===

```

= Revision History Plugin
:navtitle: Revision History
:description: A view that allows {productname} users to see historical snapshots of a document and an ability to restore from a snapshot
:description_short: View containing historical snapshots of a document.
:keywords: plugin, Revision History, history, version, snapshots, restore, changes
:pluginname: Revision History
:plugincode: revisionhistory
:plugincategory: premium

include::partial$misc/admon-premium-plugin.adoc[]

include::partial$misc/admon-requires-7.0v.adoc[]

The {pluginname} plugin provides users an ability to see how a document has changed over time and a simply to way to restore a saved version.

== Interactive example

liveDemo::{plugincode}[]

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
include::partial$misc/admon-iframe-only.adoc[]

```

= Revision History Plugin
:navtitle: Revision History
:description: A view that allows {productname} users to see historical snapshots of a document and an ability to restore from a snapshot
:description_short: View containing historical snapshots of a document.
:keywords: plugin, Revision History, history, version, snapshots, restore, changes
:pluginname: Revision History
:plugincode: revisionhistory
:plugincategory: premium

include::partial$misc/admon-premium-plugin.adoc[]

include::partial$misc/admon-requires-7.0v.adoc[]

> The {pluginname} plugin provides users an ability to see how a document has changed over time and a simply to way to restore a saved version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {pluginname} plugin offers users the ability to view document changes over time and restore previous versions effortlessly.
```

== Interactive example

liveDemo::{plugincode}[]

include::partial$misc/admon-iframe-only.adoc[]

=== How it works

The {pluginname} view is opened when clicking on the `revisionhistory` toolbar or menu button which locates under `View` menu.

The view consists of these main UI components:

* In the toolbar header, there are `Restore this version` and `Close` buttons.
** Clicking `Restore this version` will set the editor's content to the selected version and close the view. ** Pressing `Close` button will exit the view.
* The readonly diff content UI shows the changes between the selected version and the closest one, which is below the selected version. The changes are highlighted for easy recognition of the types of change being applied:
** Red: Removed content
** Green: New content
** Yellow: Content being modified. Modifications to HTML content implies attribute or format changes (bold, italic, etc)

> * The revisions sidebar renders the available versions for a document. When a new version is selected, the diff content UI is updated accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {pluginname}  is accessible via the toolbar or the menu button within the View menu, and when accessed, it opens a view. This view contains several primary user interface (UI) elements:

* The toolbar header hosts the timestamp of the version along with buttons labelled "Restore this version" and "Close."
** Clicking "Restore this version" will replace the editor's content with the chosen version and close the view.
Pressing the "Close" button will exit the view.
* The read-only diff content UI showcases the changes between the selected version and the closest one below it. These changes are visually distinguished for clarity:
** Red means removed content.
** Green means newly added content.
** Yellow means modified content. Changes to HTML content imply changes to attributes or formatting, such as making text bold, italic, etc.

*The revisions sidebar displays all available versions of a document. Upon selecting a version from the sidebar, the differential content user interface (UI) updates to reflect the changes.
```

[NOTE]

> The {pluginname} plugin treats commented HTML as actual content but the content is ignored in the diffing process. This means that a version with all its content commented appears empty in the diff content UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {pluginname} plugin interprets commented HTML as valid content, yet it disregards this content during the version comparison process. Consequently, a version containing solely commented content appears as empty in the user interface displaying the differential content.
```

  plugins: 'revisionhistory',
  toolbar: 'revisionhistory',
  // Required
  revisionhistory_fetch: () => new Promise((resolve) => {
    const revisions = [];  // Replace this with an API request to get saved versions
    resolve(revisions);
  })
});
----

== Understanding initial and current versions

When dealing with a new document, that has no saved versions, {pluginname} plugin will always typically maintain two versions: the `initial` and `current` version.

* Initial Version: this version is generated during the {productname} `Loaded` event, with the editor's content initialized.
* Current Version: is added on opening the {pluginname} with the editor's current content. If included, it will become the `latest version` and placed at the top of the revisions list.

[TIP]
If both versions are the same, only the `current version` is kept.

For documents with saved versions, the `initial version` is disregarded by the {pluginname} assuming it's already part of the version history. The current version is only discarded if it matches the closest saved version.

The below table summaries how the initial and current versions are handled in the {pluginname}:

> [cols="1,1,1,2",options="header"]
> |===
> |Initial version | Different current version | Has saved versions | Expect
> |No |No |No |No versions is shown
> |Yes |No |No |Only shows the current version
> |Yes |Yes |No |Both initial and current version are shown
> |Yes |Yes |Yes |Shows the saved versions including the current version
> |Yes |No |Yes |Only shows the saved versions
> |No |Yes |Yes |Shows the saved versions including the current version
> |No |No |Yes |Only shows the saved versions
> |===

Reviewer 3: Suggestion to improve styling of the revisions table.
```suggestion
[cols="1,1,1,3", options="header"]
|===
| Initial Version | Different Current Version | Has Saved Versions | Expect
| No   | No   | No   | No versions are shown
| Yes  | No   | No   | Only the `current` version is shown
| Yes  | Yes  | No   | Both the `initial` and `current` versions are shown
| Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | Shows the `saved` versions, including the `current` version
| Yes  | No   | Yes  | Only the `saved` versions are shown
| No   | Yes  | Yes  | Shows the `saved` versions, including the `current` version
| No   | No   | Yes  | Only the `saved` versions are shown
|===
```

** Custom content if its visual representation can be adjusted using CSS, integrators can address this by providing styling via the xref:revisionhistory_css_url.adoc[`+revisionhistory_css_url+`] option.
* Code within code blocks may not be accurately differentiated, excluding changes in newlines.

2. There is no integration for saving a version yet. For now, a workaround is to add a custom toolbar button. For example:

[source,js]
----
const revisions = [];

tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',  // change this value according to your HTML
  plugins: 'revisionhistory',
  toolbar: 'revisionhistory saveversion',
  setup: (editor) => {
    // Save the current content of the editor as a new version
    editor.ui.registry.addButton('saveversion', {
      text: 'Save a version',
      onAction: () => {
        // Change this according to your setup
        const revision = {
          content: editor.getContent({ format: 'raw' }),
          revisionId: (revisions.length + 1).toString(),
          createdAt: new Date().toISOString()
        };
        revisions.unshift(revision);
      }
    });
  },
  revisionhistory_fetch: () => Promise.resolve(revisions)
});
----

> 
> == Known issues
> 
> This section describes issues that users of {productname} may encounter:
> 
> * `table` elements with `colgroup` are highlighted as new even though there is no change.
> 

Reviewer 3: I would like to suggest removing this from the initial documentation, if anything move it to the release notes under `known issues`. @ShiridiGandham 
```suggestion
```

= Revision History Plugin
:navtitle: Revision History
:description: A view that allows {productname} users to see historical snapshots of a document and an ability to restore from a snapshot
:description_short: View containing historical snapshots of a document.
:keywords: plugin, Revision History, history, version, snapshots, restore, changes
:pluginname: Revision History
:plugincode: revisionhistory
:plugincategory: premium

include::partial$misc/admon-premium-plugin.adoc[]

include::partial$misc/admon-requires-7.0v.adoc[]

> 
> include::partial$misc/admon-iframe-only.adoc[]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

= Revision History Plugin
:navtitle: Revision History
:description: A view that allows {productname} users to see historical snapshots of a document and an ability to restore from a snapshot
:description_short: View containing historical snapshots of a document.
:keywords: plugin, Revision History, history, version, snapshots, restore, changes
:pluginname: Revision History
:plugincode: revisionhistory
:plugincategory: premium

> include::partial$misc/admon-premium-plugin.adoc[]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
include::partial$misc/admon-paid-addon-pricing.adoc[]
```

include::partial$misc/admon-requires-7.0v.adoc[]

include::partial$misc/admon-iframe-only.adoc[]

The {pluginname} plugin provides users an ability to see how a document has changed over time and a simply to way to restore a saved version.

== Interactive example

liveDemo::{plugincode}[]

=== How it works

> // TODO: Attach image of revision history

Reviewer 3: I dont think we require this.
```suggestion
```

The {pluginname} view is opened when clicking on the `revisionhistory` toolbar or menu button which locates under `View` menu.

The view consists of these main UI components:

> * In the toolbar header, there are `Restore this version` and `Close` buttons. Clicking `Restore this version` will set the editor's content to the selected version and close the view. Pressing `Close` button will exit the view.
> 
> * The readonly diff content UI shows the changes between the selected version and the closest one, which is below the selected version. The changes are highlighted for easy recognition of the types of change being applied:
> 
>   ** Red: Removed content
>   ** Green: New content
>   ** Yellow: Content being modified. Modifications to HTML content implies attribute or format changes (bold, italic, etc)
> 
> * The revisions sidebar renders the available versions for a document. When a new version is selected, the diff content UI is updated accordingly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* In the toolbar header, there are `Restore this version` and `Close` buttons.
** Clicking `Restore this version` will set the editor's content to the selected version and close the view. ** Pressing `Close` button will exit the view.
* The readonly diff content UI shows the changes between the selected version and the closest one, which is below the selected version. The changes are highlighted for easy recognition of the types of change being applied:
** Red: Removed content
** Green: New content
** Yellow: Content being modified. Modifications to HTML content implies attribute or format changes (bold, italic, etc)
* The revisions sidebar renders the available versions for a document. When a new version is selected, the diff content UI is updated accordingly.
```

[NOTE]
The {pluginname} plugin treats commented HTML as actual content but the content is ignored in the diffing process. This means that a version with all its content commented appears empty in the diff content UI.

=== Basic setup

To setup the {pluginname} plugin user-interface in the editor:

> * add `{plugincode}` to the `plugins` option in the editor configuration;
> 
> * add `{plugincode}` to the `toolbar` option in the editor configuration;
> 
> * add `{plugincode}_fetch` option to the editor configuration;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* add `{plugincode}` to the `plugins` option in the editor configuration;
* add `{plugincode}` to the `toolbar` option in the editor configuration;
* add `{plugincode}_fetch` option to the editor configuration;
```

For example:

[source,js]
----
tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',  // change this value according to your HTML
  plugins: 'revisionhistory',
  toolbar: 'revisionhistory',
  // Required
  revisionhistory_fetch: () => new Promise((resolve) => {
    const revisions = [];  // Replace this with an API request to get saved versions
    resolve(revisions);
  })
});
----

== Understanding initial and current versions

> A new document, that has no saved versions, always has at max two versions: the initial version and current version. 
> 
> * Initial version is created on {productname} `Loaded` event with the content initialized with the editor.
> * Current version is added on opening the {pluginname} with the editor's current content. If included, it is always be the latest version and placed at the top.
> 
> If both versions are the same, only the current version is kept.
> 
> When a document has saved versions, its initial version is discarded as the {pluginname} assumes it already a part of versions. The current version is only discarded if it matches to the closest version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When dealing with a new document, that has no saved versions, {pluginname} plugin will always typically maintain two versions: the `initial` and `current` version.

* Initial Version: this version is generated during the {productname} `Loaded` event, with the editor's content initialized.
* Current Version: is added on opening the {pluginname} with the editor's current content. If included, it will become the `latest version` and placed at the top of the revisions list.

[TIP]
If both versions are the same, only the `current version` is kept.

For documents with saved versions, the `initial version` is disregarded by the {pluginname} assuming it's already part of the version history. The current version is only discarded if it matches the closest saved version.
```

> The below table summaries how the initial and current versions are handled in the {pluginname}:
> [cols="1,1,1,2",options="header"]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The below table summaries how the initial and current versions are handled in the {pluginname}:

[cols="1,1,1,2",options="header"]
```

|===
|Initial version | Different current version | Has saved versions | Expect
|No |No |No |No versions is shown
|Yes |No |No |Only shows the current version
|Yes |Yes |No |Both initial and current version are shown
|Yes |Yes |Yes |Shows the saved versions including the current version
|Yes |No |Yes |Only shows the saved versions
|No |Yes |Yes |Shows the saved versions including the current version
|No |No |Yes |Only shows the saved versions
|===

[NOTE]
`Different current version` implies whether the current version is different than the initial version. When the editor is loaded with content, the two versions are the same.

== Limitations

1. There are several known limitations when it comes to the plugin's content diffing capability.

* For the listed content below, the {pluginname} might not be able to render them as how they are rendered in the editor and the diffing might not correctly reflects the changes on them:

> ** Content that is annotated or its visual representation provided by a plugin: ie: comments, pagebreak, etc.
> ** Custom content. Note: If its visual representation can be addressed by CSS then it is up the integrators to provide the styling via xref:revisionhistory_css_url.adoc[`+revisionhistory_css_url+`] option.
> * Code inside `code` block except for the newlines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
** Annotated content or content whose visual representation is provided by a plugin, such as comments or page breaks.
** Custom content if its visual representation can be adjusted using CSS, integrators can address this by providing styling via the xref:revisionhistory_css_url.adoc[`+revisionhistory_css_url+`] option.
* Code within code blocks may not be accurately differentiated, excluding changes in newlines.
```

2. There is no integration for saving a version yet. For now, a workaround is to add a custom toolbar button. For example:

[source,js]
----
const revisions = [];

tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',  // change this value according to your HTML
  plugins: 'revisionhistory',
  toolbar: 'revisionhistory saveversion',
  setup: (editor) => {
    // Save the current content of the editor as a new version
    editor.ui.registry.addButton('saveversion', {
      text: 'Save a version',
      onAction: () => {
        // Change this according to your setup
        const revision = {
          content: editor.getContent({ format: 'raw' }),
          revisionId: (revisions.length + 1).toString(),
          createdAt: new Date().toISOString()
        };
        revisions.unshift(revision);
      }
    });
  },
  revisionhistory_fetch: () => Promise.resolve(revisions)
});
----

> == Known issues

Reviewer 3: @ShiridiGandham Can you verify that we want this included in the `initial`?

> This section describes issues that users of {productname} may encounter:
> 
> * `table` elements with `colgroup` are highlighted as new even though there is no change.
> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

This section describes issues that users of {productname} may encounter:

* `table` elements with `colgroup` are highlighted as new even though there is no change.

```

> == Limitations
> 
> 1. There are several known limitations when it comes to the plugin's content diffing capability.
> 
> * For the listed content below, the {pluginname} might not be able to render them as how they are rendered in the editor and the diffing might not correctly reflects the changes on them:
> ** Annotated content or content whose visual representation is provided by a plugin, such as comments or page breaks.
> ** Custom content if its visual representation can be adjusted using CSS, integrators can address this by providing styling via the xref:revisionhistory_css_url[`+revisionhistory_css_url+`] option.
> * Code within code blocks may not be accurately differentiated, excluding changes in newlines.
> 
> 2. There is no integration for saving a version yet. For now, a workaround is to add a custom toolbar button. For example:
> 
> [source,js]
> ----
> const revisions = [];
> 
> tinymce.init({
>   selector: 'textarea',  // change this value according to your HTML
>   plugins: 'revisionhistory',
>   toolbar: 'revisionhistory saveversion',
>   setup: (editor) => {
>     // Save the current content of the editor as a new version
>     editor.ui.registry.addButton('saveversion', {
>       text: 'Save a version',
>       onAction: () => {
>         // Change this according to your setup
>         const revision = {
>           content: editor.getContent({ format: 'raw' }),
>           revisionId: (revisions.length + 1).toString(),
>           createdAt: new Date().toISOString()
>         };
>         revisions.unshift(revision);
>       }
>     });
>   },
>   revisionhistory_fetch: () => Promise.resolve(revisions)
> });
> ----

Reviewer 3: Q: are we moving this for `initial release`.
```suggestion
== Limitations

1. There are several known limitations when it comes to the plugin's content diffing capability.

* For the listed content below, the {pluginname} might not be able to render them as how they are rendered in the editor and the diffing might not correctly reflects the changes on them:
** Annotated content or content whose visual representation is provided by a plugin, such as comments or page breaks.
** Custom content if its visual representation can be adjusted using CSS, integrators can address this by providing styling via the xref:revisionhistory_css_url[`+revisionhistory_css_url+`] option.
* Code within code blocks may not be accurately differentiated, excluding changes in newlines.

2. There is no integration for saving a version yet. For now, a workaround is to add a custom toolbar button. For example:

[source,js]
----
const revisions = [];

tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',  // change this value according to your HTML
  plugins: 'revisionhistory',
  toolbar: 'revisionhistory saveversion',
  setup: (editor) => {
    // Save the current content of the editor as a new version
    editor.ui.registry.addButton('saveversion', {
      text: 'Save a version',
      onAction: () => {
        // Change this according to your setup
        const revision = {
          content: editor.getContent({ format: 'raw' }),
          revisionId: (revisions.length + 1).toString(),
          createdAt: new Date().toISOString()
        };
        revisions.unshift(revision);
      }
    });
  },
  revisionhistory_fetch: () => Promise.resolve(revisions)
});
----
```

Reviewer 2: It is already moved

= Revision History Plugin
:navtitle: Revision History
:description: A view that allows {productname} users to view historical snapshots of saved revisions of the document, giving them the option to select a previous version to replace the editors content.
:description_short: View containing historial snapshots of previous editor states.
:keywords: plugin, Revision History, changes, history, track, restore.
:pluginname: Revision History
:plugincode: revisionhistory
:plugincategory: premium

include::partial$misc/admon-premium-plugin.adoc[]

include::partial$misc/admon-requires-6.8v.adoc[]
// TODO: change to 7.0v when admonition is available

> // TODO: Add an introduction. What does the plugin do? Why would I use this plugin? Keep it concise.

Author: anything else to the following sections? @tiny-ben-tran
